




1. Data Structures in Python

In data science, understanding how to structure and manipulate data effectively is essential. Python offers several built-in data structures that you'll frequently use.

Lists: Ordered, mutable sequences of elements.

Example: my_list = [1, 2, 3, 4]


Dictionaries: Key-value pairs, allowing fast lookups.

Example: my_dict = {"name": "Alice", "age": 25}


Sets: Unordered collections of unique elements.

Example: my_set = {1, 2, 3}


Tuples: Ordered, immutable sequences.

Example: my_tuple = (1, 2, 3)



Exercise:

1. Create a list, dictionary, set, and tuple to store data for a small dataset of students (e.g., names, ages, and grades).


2. Write code that performs common operations with each data structure: adding, updating, or accessing elements.




---

2. Introduction to Linear Algebra

Linear algebra is crucial for understanding many machine learning algorithms. Let’s cover some basics:

Vectors: An array of numbers (1D), used to represent points or directions in space.

Example: 


Matrices: A 2D array of numbers, used to store datasets or transformations.

Example:



A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 \\ 3 & 4 \end{bmatrix}

Exercise:

1. Define two vectors and add them together. Then try scalar multiplication (multiplying a vector by a single number).


2. Define two matrices and perform element-wise addition and subtraction.


3. Practice matrix multiplication with examples.




---

3. Python Libraries for Linear Algebra: NumPy

Python’s NumPy library is essential for data science and machine learning. It’s optimized for numerical operations and simplifies working with vectors, matrices, and arrays.

Basics with NumPy:

1. Creating Arrays: Use numpy.array() to create vectors or matrices.

Example: np.array([1, 2, 3]) for a vector or np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4]]) for a matrix.



2. Operations: NumPy makes it easy to perform element-wise operations and matrix multiplication.

Addition: A + B

Multiplication: np.dot(A, B) for matrix multiplication or A * B for element-wise multiplication.




Exercise:

1. Import NumPy and create a vector and a matrix.


2. Perform matrix operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication) using NumPy.


3. Calculate the dot product of two vectors.




---

Resources

Documentation: NumPy documentation will be helpful for learning array operations.

Additional Reading: Khan Academy has free resources on linear algebra basics.



Here recap of the 6-month training plan structured for your journey into data science, broken down into months and weeks with specific topics and tasks:

Month 1: Foundations of Data Science & Mathematics for ML
Weeks 1-2: Statistics Basics

Topics: Mean, median, variance, standard deviation, distributions, probability basics.
Practice: Exercises with Python’s statistics module.
Weeks 3-4: Linear Algebra and Matrix Operations

Topics: Matrix multiplication, vectors, determinants, eigenvalues/eigenvectors.
Practice: Applications in Python using NumPy.
Month 2: Programming and Data Manipulation with Python
Weeks 5-6: Python for Data Science

Topics: Functions, list comprehensions, error handling, basic algorithms.
Practice: Exercises on data manipulation without libraries.
Weeks 7-8: Introduction to Pandas for Data Handling

Topics: DataFrames, handling missing values, data cleaning techniques.
Practice: Real-life dataset cleaning and manipulation tasks.
Month 3: Data Analysis and Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
Weeks 9-10: Introduction to EDA

Topics: Data visualization basics, understanding data distributions, detecting outliers.
Practice: Visualizations with Matplotlib and Seaborn.
Weeks 11-12: Data Scaling and Preprocessing

Topics: Normalization, standardization, techniques for dealing with categorical variables.
Practice: Preprocessing pipeline setup with Scikit-learn.
Month 4: Machine Learning Basics
Weeks 13-14: Supervised Learning

Topics: Linear regression, decision trees, basic metrics for model evaluation (accuracy, precision, recall).
Practice: Building and evaluating simple models using Scikit-learn.
Weeks 15-16: Unsupervised Learning

Topics: Clustering (k-means), dimensionality reduction (PCA).
Practice: Implement clustering and PCA on datasets.
Month 5: Introduction to AI and Neural Networks
Weeks 17-18: Neural Network Basics

Topics: Introduction to neural networks, perceptron, activation functions.
Practice: Building a basic neural network from scratch.
Weeks 19-20: Tools for Deep Learning (TensorFlow/PyTorch)

Topics: Setting up neural networks in TensorFlow or PyTorch.
Practice: Implementing a simple neural network using a deep learning library.
Month 6: Advanced Topics and Final Project
Weeks 21-22: Advanced Model Evaluation

Topics: Cross-validation, hyperparameter tuning, bias-variance trade-off.
Practice: Fine-tuning models for better performance.
Weeks 23-24: Project-Based Learning

Task: Choose a small project (e.g., predict housing prices, classify images).
Goal: Apply everything learned to complete a full data science workflow.
Additional Notes
Each month focuses on building foundational concepts and skills that will support your journey into data science and machine learning.
Ensure you practice regularly and work on projects to reinforce your understanding.
Don’t hesitate to reach out for any additional help or clarification on specific topics as you progress through each section.
Summary
This structured outline provides a comprehensive path through the key areas of data science, preparing you with both the theoretical understanding and the practical skills necessary to succeed in the field.